---
layout: post
title:  "Introducing TCP-in-UDP solution"
---

The MPTCP protocol is complex, mainly to be able to survive on the Internet
where
[middleboxes](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc8684#name-interactions-with-middlebox)
such as NATs, firewalls, IDS or proxies can modify parts of the TCP packets.
Worst case scenario, an MPTCP connection should fallback to "plain" TCP. Today,
such fallbacks are rarer than before -- probably because MPTCP has been used
since 2013 on millions of Apple smartphones worldwide -- but they can still
exist, e.g. on some mobile networks using Performance Enhancing Proxies (PEPs)
where MPTCP connections are not bypassed. In such cases, a solution to continue
benefiting from MPTCP is to tunnel the MPTCP connections. Different solutions
exist, but they usually add extra layers, and requires setting a virtual private
network (VPN) up with private IP addresses between the client and the server.

Here, a simpler solution is presented:
[TCP-in-UDP](https://github.com/multipath-tcp/tcp-in-udp). This solution relies
on [eBPF](https://ebpf.io/), doesn't add extra data per packet, and doesn't
require a virtual private network. Read on to find out more about that!

<!--more-->

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

> First, if the network you use blocks TCP extensions like MPTCP or other
> protocols, the best thing to do is to contact your network operator: maybe
> they are simply not aware of this issue, and can easily fix it.

## TCP-in-UDP

Many tunnel solutions exist, but they have other use-cases: getting access to
private networks, eventually with encryptions -- with solutions like OpenVPN,
IPSec, WireGuard®, etc. -- or to add extra info in each packet for routing
purposes -- like GRE, GENEVE, etc. The Linux kernel
[supports](https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2019/05/17/an-introduction-to-linux-virtual-interfaces-tunnels)
many of these tunnels. In our case, the goal is not to get access to private
networks and not to add an extra layer of encryption, but to make sure packets
are not being modified by the network.

For our use-case, it is then enough to "convert the TCP packets in UDP". This
what [TCP-in-UDP](https://github.com/multipath-tcp/tcp-in-udp) is doing. This
idea is not new, it is inspired by an old [IETF
draft](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-cheshire-tcp-over-udp-00.html).
In short, items from the TCP header are re-ordered to start with items from the
UDP header.

### TCP to UDP header

To better understand the translation, let's see how the different headers look
like:

- [UDP](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc768.html):

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|          Source Port          |       Destination Port        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|            Length             |           Checksum            |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

- [TCP](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc9293.html):

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|          Source Port          |       Destination Port        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Sequence Number                        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                    Acknowledgment Number                      |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Data |       |C|E|U|A|P|R|S|F|                               |
| Offset| Reser |R|C|R|C|S|S|Y|I|            Window             |
|       |       |W|E|G|K|H|T|N|N|                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|           Checksum            |         Urgent Pointer        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                      (Optional) Options                       |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

- [TCP-in-UDP](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/draft-cheshire-tcp-over-udp-00.html):

```
 0                   1                   2                   3
 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 1
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|          Source Port          |       Destination Port        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|            Length             |           Checksum            |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|  Data |       |C|E| |A|P|R|S|F|                               |
| Offset| Reser |R|C|0|C|S|S|Y|I|            Window             |
|       |       |W|E| |K|H|T|N|N|                               |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                        Sequence Number                        |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                    Acknowledgment Number                      |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
|                      (Optional) Options                       |
+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+-+
```

As described
[here](https://perso.uclouvain.be/olivier.bonaventure/blog/html/2013/07/04/tcp_over_udp.html),
the first eight bytes of the TCP-in-UDP header correspond to the classical UDP
header. Then, the Data Offset is placed with the flags and the window field.
Placing the Data Offset after the Checksum ensures that a value larger than
`0x5` will appear there, which is required for STUN traversal. Then, the
sequence numbers and acknowledgment numbers follow. With this translation, the
TCP header has been reordered, but starts with a UDP header without modifying
the packet length. The informed reader will have noticed that the `URG` flag and
the `Urgent Pointer` have disappeared. This field is rarely used and some
middleboxes reset it. This is not a huge loss for most TCP applications.

In other words, apart from a different order, the only two modifications are:

- the layer 4 protocol indicated in layer 3 (IPv4/IPv6)
- the switch from `Urgent Pointer` to `Length` (and the opposite)

These two modifications will of course affect the Checksum field that will need
to be updated accordingly.

## Dealing with network stack optimisations

On paper, the required modifications -- protocol, a 16-bit word, and adapt the
checksum -- are small, and should be easy to do using eBPF with TC ingress and
egress hooks. But doing that in a highly optimised stack is more complex than
expected.

### Accessing all required data

On Linux, all per-packet data are stored in a socket buffer, or
"[SKB](http://oldvger.kernel.org/~davem/skb.html)". In our case here, the eBPF
code needs to access the packet header, which should be available between
`skb->data` and `skb->data_end`. Except that, `skb->data_end` might not point to
the end of the packet, but typically it points to the end of the packet header.
This is an optimisation, because the kernel will often do operations depending
on the packet header, and it doesn't really care about the content of the data,
which is usually more for the userspace, or to be forwarded to another network
interface.

In our case, in egress -- translation from TCP to UDP -- it is fine: the whole
TCP header is available, and that's where the modifications will need to be
done. In ingress -- translation from UDP to TCP -- that's different: some
network drivers will only align data going up to the end of the layer 4
protocol, so the 8 bytes of the UDP header here. This is not enough to do the
translation, as it is required to access the 12 more bytes. This issue is easy
to fix: eBPF helpers were introduced a long time ago to pull in non-linear data,
e.g. via
[`bpf_skb_pull_data`](https://docs.ebpf.io/linux/helper-function/bpf_skb_pull_data/)
or
[`bpf_skb_load_bytes`](https://docs.ebpf.io/linux/helper-function/bpf_skb_load_bytes/).

### GRO & TSO/GSO

On the Internet, packets are usually limited to 1500 bytes or fewer. Each packet
still needs to carry some headers to indicate the source and destination, but
also per-packet information like the data sequence number. Having to deal with
"small" packets has a cost which can be very high to deal with very high
throughput. To counter that, the Linux networking stack will prefer to deal with
bigger chunks of data, with "internal" packets of tens of kilobytes, and split
the packet into smaller ones with very similar header later on. Some network
devices can even do this segmentation or aggregation work in hardware. That's
what GRO (Generic Receive Offload), and TSO (TCP Segmentation Offload) / GSO
(Generic Segmentation Offload) are for.

With TCP-in-UDP, it is required to act on a per-packet basis: each TCP packet
will be translated to UDP, which will contain the UDP header (8 bytes), the rest
of the TCP one (12 bytes + the TCP options), then the TCP payload. In other
words, for each UDP packet, the UDP payload will contain a part of the TCP
header: data that is per-packet specific. It means that the traditional GRO and
TSO cannot be used because the data cannot "simply" be merged with the next one
like before.

Informed readers will then say that these network device features can be easily
disabled using `ethtool`, e.g.

```
ethtool -K "${IFACE}" gro off gso off tso off
```

Correct, but even if all hardware offload accelerations are disabled, in egress,
the Linux networking stack still has interest to deal with bigger packets
internally, and do the segmentation in software at the end. Because it is not
easily possible to modify how the segmentation will be done with eBPF, it is
required to tell the stack not to do this optimisation, e.g. with:

```
ip link set "${IFACE}" gso_max_segs 1
```

### Checksum

> The following was certainly the most frustrating issue to deal with!

Thanks to how the checksum is
[computed](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1071), moving some 16-bit
words or bigger around doesn't change the checksum. Still, some fields need to
be updated:

- The layer 4 protocol, set in layer 3 (IPv4/IPv6) here, also used to compute
  the next layer (UDP/TCP) checksum.
- The switch from the TCP `Urgent Pointer` (`0`) to the UDP `Length` (and the
  opposite).

It is not required to recompute the full checksum. Instead, this can be done
[incrementally](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1141), and some eBPF
helpers can do that for us, e.g.
[`bpf_l3_csum_replace`](https://docs.ebpf.io/linux/helper-function/bpf_l3_csum_replace/)
and
[`bpf_l4_csum_replace`](https://docs.ebpf.io/linux/helper-function/bpf_l4_csum_replace/).

When testing with Network namespaces (`netns`) with one host dedicated to the
translation when forwarding packets, everything was fine: the correct checksum
was visible in each packet. But when testing with real hardware, with TCP-in-UDP
eBPF hooks directly on the client and server, that was different: the checksum
in egress was incorrect on most network interfaces, even when the transmission
checksum offload (`tx`) was disabled on the network interface.

After quite a bit of investigation, it appears that both the layer 3 and 4
checksums were correctly updated by the eBPF hook, but either the NIC or the
networking stack was modifying the layer 4 checksum at the wrong place. This
deserves some explanation.

In egress, the Linux TCP networking stack of the sender will typically set
`skb->ip_summed` to `CHECKSUM_PARTIAL`. In short, it means the TCP/IP stack will
compute a part of the checksum, only the one covering the
[pseudo-header](https://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc9293.html#section-3.1-6.18.1): IP
addresses, protocol number and length. The rest will be computed later on,
ideally by the networking device. At that last stage, the device only needs to
know where the layer 4 starts in the packet, but also where the checksum field
is from the start of this layer 4. This info is internally registered in
`skb->csum_offset`, and it is different for TCP and UDP because the checksum
field is not at the same place in their headers.

When switching from UDP to TCP, it is then not enough to change the protocol
number in the layer 3, this internal checksum offset value also needs to be
updated. If I'm not mistaken, today, it is not possible to update it directly
with eBPF. A proper solution is certainly to add a new eBPF helper, but that
would only work with newer kernels, or eventually with a custom module. Instead,
a workaround has been found: chain the eBPF TC egress hook with a TC `ACT_CSUM`
action when the packet is translated from TCP to UDP. This [`csum`
action](https://www.man7.org/linux/man-pages/man8/tc-csum.8.html) triggers a
software checksum recalculation of the specified packet headers. In other words
and in our case, it is used to compute the rest of the checksum for a given
protocol (UDP), and mark the checksum as computed (`CHECKSUM_NONE`). This last
step is important, because even if it is possible to compute the full checksum
with eBPF code like we did at some point, it is wrong to do so if we cannot
change the `CHECKSUM_PARTIAL` flag which expect a later stage to update a
checksum at a (wrong) offset with the rest of the data.

So with a combination of both TC `ACT_CSUM` and eBPF, it is possible to get the
right checksum after having modified the layer 4 protocol.

### MTU/MSS

This is not linked to the highly optimised Linux network stack, but, on the
wire, the packets will be in UDP and not TCP. It means that some operations like
the dynamic adaptation of the MSS (TCP Maximum Segment Size) -- aka MSS clamping
-- will have no effects here. Many mobile networks uses encapsulation without
jumbo frames, meaning that the maximum size is lower than 1500 bytes. For
performance reasons, and not to have to deal with this, it is important to avoid
IP fragmentation. In other words, it might be required to adapt the interface
Maximum Transmission Unit (MTU), or the
[MTU](https://man.archlinux.org/man/ip-route.8.en#mtu) /
[MSS](https://man.archlinux.org/man/ip-route.8.en#advmss) per destination.

## Conclusion

In conclusion, this new eBPF program can be easily deployed on both the client
and server sides to circumvent middleboxes that are still blocking MPTCP or
other protocols. All you might still need to do is to modify the destination
port which is [currently
hardcoded](https://github.com/multipath-tcp/tcp-in-udp/blob/cde92b1cf8588f7cd3932b204cd51e0596a07ade/tcp_in_udp_tc.c#L29).

## Acknowledgments

Thanks to [Xpedite Technologies](https://xpedite-tech.com) for having supported
this work, and in particular [Chester](https://github.com/arinc9) for his help
investigating the checksum issues with real hardware. Also thanks to Nickz from
the eBPF.io community for his support while working on these checksum issues.
